---
layout: post
title:  "Test Driving Aurelia"
date:   2017-06-28 13:25:00 -0400
categories: groovy grails mongo debugging hacking
---

*Originally published 2014, Rally Engineering Blog*

At Rally, we like to hack. During hack time, I like to try out new things and make sure I'm staying abreast of new technologies that are coming into focus. I've done several projects with Angular and was following along with Rob Eisenberg and his contributions to the development of Angular 2.0. Last November, Rob left the Angular 2.0 project and since then has been building a new framework called Aurelia. I've been watching Aurelia and was interested in taking the early preview out for a test drive. "Early preview" means somewhere between alpha and beta, so, caveat emptor!
# The Code

I started with a full stack template that includes the official Aurelia bootstrapping application and a simple node/Express 4 backend. This gave me a skeleton Aurelia app in public/app. The first step was to add a new view and view model.

# Project Setup

For the view model, I'm setting up a constructor, an activate function that will receive data when the router navigates to a path that this view model handles, and a canDeactivate hook function that can block navigation, flush state, or ask for confirmation before the view model is deactivated if there is unsaved data sitting in the browser.

hello.js:
````javascript
  export class Hello{
    constructor() {
    }
 
    activate(){
    }

    canDeactivate() {
    }
}  
````

hello.html:
````html
<template>
  <section>
    <h2>${heading}</h2>
    Hi!  I hope you enjoy using aurelia!
   </section>
</template>
````

After adding the view model and view template, let's add the module to the router in app.js. The router has various options that can be explored here. In this example, we're going to use the nav option to ensure a tab shows up. nav-bar.html and nav-bar.js use the router's navigation model (router.navigation) to display the navbar tabs. Notice also that the router is being injected via the static inject() function.

app.js:

````javascript
import {Router} from 'aurelia-router';
import bootstrap from 'bootstrap';
 
export class App {
  static inject() { return [Router]; }
  constructor(router) {
    this.router = router;
    this.router.configure(config => {
      config.title = 'Aurelia';
      config.map([
        { route: ['','welcome'],  moduleId: './welcome',      nav: true, title:'Welcome' },
        { route: 'hello',  moduleId: './hello', nav: true, title: "Hello world!" },
        { route: 'flickr',        moduleId: './flickr',       nav: true },
        { route: 'child-router',  moduleId: './child-router', nav: true, title:'Child Router' }
      ]);
    });
  }
}
````

 

As someone familiar with Angular and being a long-time Java/Spring user, it's great to see the ability to create modular, testable code and inject services into view models is first class in Aurelia. It was soon apparent that extracting code to the service layer pattern was in order. I can create a hello service pretty easily; it's just a module.

hello_service.js:

````javascript
export class helloservice {
  constructor() {
 
  }
  sayHi() {
    return "hola";
  }
 
}
````

Then I can inject it into my hello.js. You will notice that these examples are using ES6 constructs like modules and classes.

hello.js:
````javascript
import {helloservice} from './services/hello_service'
export class Hello{
  static inject()  { return [helloservice]; }
  constructor(helloservice) {
        this.heading = 'Welcome to the Aurelia Navigation App!';
        this.helloservice = helloservice;
  }
 
  activate(){
    this.hello = this.helloservice.sayHi();
  }
  canDeactivate() {
 
  }
}
````
We can also create a template and bind the data to the template.

components/greeting.js
````javascript
import {Behavior} from 'aurelia-framework';
 
export class GreetingCustomElement {
  static metadata(){
    return Behavior.withProperty('greeting');
  }
}
````
components/greeting.html
````html
<template>
  <strong>${greeting}</strong>
</template>
````

I can now change hello.html to require the new component I've built and bind the hello variable that is created in the hello view model to the greeting variable that is exposed via the metadata function in the custom element.

hello.html:
````html
<template>
  <require from="components/greeting" ></require>
 
  <section>
    <h2>${heading}</h2>
    <greeting greeting.bind="hello"></greeting>
      I hope you enjoy using aurelia!
   </section>
</template>
````

# The Awesome!

After playing with Aurelia, I'm very excited about how easy it is to use. When evaluating a framework or technology, the less it gets in the way, the better. Aurelia proved to be very simple to get going; it leverages both ES6 and three of the four web component standards (templates, shadow dom, html imports) and provides polyfills for IE. Aurelia has a custom element model that doesn't use document.registerElement, however, it does allow you to create custom elements.

I also like having router support out of the box. It seems that several popular frameworks tend to ship early versions without a client-side router, but having one that is well thought out and cohesive with the rest of the application is a strong selling point. It also helps align the community efforts around improving the framework router, rather than having several projects spring up that are trying to concurrently solve the client-side routing problem.

The HTTP client was quick to get set up and uses ES6 promises. It has a simple, intuitive API with conveniences to access headers, status codes, parsed content from the raw response body, and a configure() function that allows you to use a fluent API for configuring HTTP requests.

# The Head Scratchers

I did encounter a few items that were puzzling to me. I ended up creating a service that wrapped the Aurelia http client and made API calls to my back end. In each case, I need to handle certain HTTP status codes in a consistent manner. I ended up adding the same error handler in the promise chain. I missed having something like an HTTP interceptor that could apply to all AJAX calls that the client side code makes.

I also ended up having to bake my own cookie service. It's nothing fancy (like most cookie-reading code ends up being) but this could be an opportunity to provide as an Aurelia module.

The dependency injection, while a great pattern, was verbose. Each time I want to extract common code into a shared component, I have to import the module, add the module to the static block, and also add a constructor argument. It seems like there could be a more elegant way (perhaps inject() could handle setting the property?).

# What's Next?

In conclusion, Aurelia has lots of promise. While it's clearly not yet ready for prime time (it's about three months after the first public preview release), the simplicy of design, passion of the core members, and ease of use make this a project worth watching. If Angular 2.0 is making you a bit skittish and you need to choose a front-end framework in the next six months, make sure you are up to date with what Aurelia is doing, as it looks like it has promise ... and promises!

This demo code is available on: [github](https://github.com/RallySoftware/aurelia-hack)

Clone it and run gulp watch

Check it out: [Aurelia Home](http://aurelia.io/)

[Aurelia Q&A](http://eisenbergeffect.bluespire.com/aurelia-qa/)
